+++
title = '20240616'
date = 2024-06-16T15:58:23-07:00
draft = true
+++

## A third option
I am still working to find a reliable way to test process handoff in a cluster.
[LocalCluster](https://github.com/whitfin/local-cluster) seemed promising, but its internal mechanism for spawning remote nodes uses `:slave.start_link` which requires converting the calling process node into a distributed node and that is not going to be work for the scenario I'm testing.
I'm going to need to hack the library code or create my own implementation to support my use case.

Now that I've spent some time working with both `LocalCluster` and `ExUnitCLusteredCase`, I have a fairly good idea of what I need to build my own implementation.
I need to start remote nodes with `:peer.start_link` which will allow linking the remote node processes to the calling process without needing a base distributed node.

As I look online for a few more examples of using the `:peer` library for spawning nodes, I come across another package, [ExUnitCluster](https://github.com/sindrip/ex_unit_cluster), which is a very simple implementation of what I'm trying to build with `:peer.start_link`.
The source code is only about 200 lines of code including empty lines so I don't even bother adding the package as a dependency and instead just copy the file contents to a new module in my project.

I create a simple test case to demo the module:
```ex
test "demo ex_unit_cluster", ctx do
  cluster = start_supervised!({ClusterHelper.Manager, ctx})
  node1 = ClusterHelper.start_node(cluster)
  node2 = ClusterHelper.start_node(cluster)

  IO.inspect(ClusterHelper.call(cluster, node1, Node, :list, []))
  IO.inspect(ClusterHelper.call(cluster, node2, Node, :list, []))end
```

And the logging result shows me two things.
First, the hardcoded endpoint server port is having a conflict just like it was with `LocalCluster` before overriding the application environment.
The second thing is that the two spawned nodes are connected to each other and there is not a master node in the cluster like was the case with `LocalCluster`.
```ex
01:01:55.430 [error] Running MinotaurWeb.Endpoint with Bandit 1.5.0 at http failed, port 4002 already in use
01:01:56.143 [error] Running MinotaurWeb.Endpoint with Bandit 1.5.0 at http failed, port 4002 already in use
[:"Elixir_Minotaur_Cluster_GameSessionTest_test_demo_ex_unit_cluster-4-16088@127.0.0.1"]
[:"Elixir_Minotaur_Cluster_GameSessionTest_test_demo_ex_unit_cluster-450-16088@127.0.0.1"]
```

Since I added the `ExUnitCluster` source code directly to my project, it is very simple to implement the same environment override option that `LocalCluster` used.
I change the code for loading application environment from this:
```ex
for {app, _, _} <- Application.loaded_applications() do
  for {key, val} <- Application.get_all_env(app) do
    peer_call(pid, Application, :put_env, [app, key, val])
  end
end
```

To this:
```ex
for {app, _, _} <- Application.loaded_applications() do
  base = Application.get_all_env(app)

  environment =
    opts
    |> Keyword.get(:environment, [])
    |> Keyword.get(app, [])
    |> Keyword.merge(base, fn _, v, _ -> v end)

  for {key, val} <- environment do
    peer_call(pid, Application, :put_env, [app, key, val])
  end
end
```

The change is so straightforward, I fork the repo, add some test cases, and open a [pull request](https://github.com/sindrip/ex_unit_cluster/pull/3).

