+++
title = 'Ecto in Production (Part 2)'
date = 2024-07-04T11:45:15-07:00
categories = ['Minotaur']
tags = ['Elixir', 'Ecto', 'Docker', 'PostgreSQL']
+++

## Troubleshooting Postgrex
My container application is not connecting to PostgreSQL on the host machine.
To troubleshoot the issue, I want to rule out some variables such as the container networking.

I add `postgresql-client` to the Dockerfile and build a new temporary image for troubleshooting.
I launch a container with this new image and attempt to connect to the PostgreSQL server:
```bash
$ docker run -it --entrypoint /bin/bash --add-host=host.docker.internal:host-gateway minotaur:tmp
$ psql -h host.docker.internal -d minotaur_production -U minotaur_application
psql: error: could not connect to server: Connection timed out
        Is the server running on host "host.docker.internal" (172.17.0.1) and accepting
        TCP/IP connections on port 5432?
```

Immediately after reading the error message, I realize that I never configured PostgreSQL to accept connections from the Docker bridge network.

## Configure PostgreSQL networking

I update `pg_hba.conf` of the host PostgreSQL service to allow connections from the default Docker bridge network subnet.
```
# TYPE  DATABASE        USER            ADDRESS                 METHOD
host    minotaur_prod   minotaur_app    172.17.0.0/16           md5
```

I then update `postgresql.conf` to listen on all addresses instead of the default `localhost`.
```
listen_addresses = '*'
```

I then restart the PostgreSQL service to apply these configuration changes.
```
$ sudo systemctl restart postgresql
```

I connect back to the troubleshooting container and try to connect to PostgreSQL server again.
The connection still times out.

My guess is the connection is being blocked by the firewall since I have not explicitly granted access to the PostgreSQL port.
I allow connections to port 5432 from addresses within the default Docker bridge network subnet.
```
$ sudo ufw allow from 172.17.0.0/16 to any port 5432
```

Back within the troubleshooting container, I run the `psql` command again to connect and I am prompted for a password!
I plug in the password for the application user and the connection is successful.

I am now confident that Ecto can connect to the database through the Postgrex module.
I stop the troubleshooting container and again launch a standalone container for the Phoenix webserver:
```
docker run -e SECRET_KEY_BASE=$MINOTAUR_SECRET_KEY_BASE -e DATABASE_URL=$MINOTAUR_DATABASE_URL --add-host=host.docker.internal:host-gateway minotaur:ecto
```

The logs show the application starts up, the Phoenix endpoint is listening, and there are no error logs from Postgrex.
Ecto is now working in production!

The next steps are to create a workflow for running migrations in production.

