+++
title = 'Completing Authentication Live Views'
date = 2024-07-10
categories = ['Minotaur']
tags = ['Elixir', 'Phoenix', 'LiveView', 'Authentication']
+++

I continue to implement the new authentication live views based on the generated files from running `mix phx.gen.auth` in a demo project.
I need to update the `create` function in `UserSesssionController` to authenticate with email instead of username, but this function is used by the existing login page.
I rename the existing `create` function to `create_with_username` which will be a temporary change until the old login page can be deleted.
I add a new `create` function which is an alias of the original.
I then update the existing login route to use the `create_with_username` action in the `router.ex` file.

As I begin copying tests and behavior for the `UserSessionController` module from the generated files, some of the existing game live view tests start failing.
These existing live views use the default `on_mount` hook that I've defined to set user data on the live view socket before mounting.

I remove the references to this hook from each of the three live view modules and wrap the associated live routes in a `live_session` block which registers the `ensure_authenticated` hook which I copied from the generated `UserAuth` module.
`ensure_authenticated` adds the user data to the socket or sets a flash message to be displayed if the request is not authenticated.

```ex
  scope "/", MinotaurWeb do
    pipe_through [:browser, :require_authenticated_user]

    live_session :require_authenticated_user, on_mount: [{MinotaurWeb.UserAuth, :ensure_authenticated}] do
      live "/", HomeLive, :index
      live "/lobby/:lobby_id", LobbyLive, :index
      live "/game/:game_id", GameLive, :index
    end
  end
```

I then finish adding `UserSessionController` tests for authenticating with email in the updated `create` function.
I follow the same pattern as the registration module of adding tests from generated files and implementing the dependent functions until the tests pass.

I add the `/users/log_out` route which will remove the user token from the session, but since the tokens are not persisted, they are not invalidated.
I'll have to implement the invalidation behavior after I add the `UserToken` table with Ecto.

I wrap up the new views by adding the login live view after copying all tests from the generated files.
Finally, I remove the original "dead" controller-based views, routes, and unused code related to username authentication.

It took me a few hours to get the new authentication live views implemented as I methodically read through each line of code as it was added.
This was worth the time investment to me since I now have a deeper understanding of how these modules work and there is less "magic" around this system compared to blindly copy/pasting generated modules.

